---
title: "Project: Getting started with Synto"
---

This week's project gets you started using [synto](https://github.com/kytmanov/synto), an llm-wiki installed on Rosie for this course.  Once you are started, you can decide whether you want to continue to explore synto throughout the term.

# Cloning the course synto repo
This course is already set up as a Synto repository. Clone the repository to somewhere on Rosie:

```
git clone git@gitlab.com:yoderj/survey-deep-learning.git csc6741
```

Then `cd` into the course repo to prepare to run synto later.

# Installing synto to your account
As mentioned previously, `synto` is already installed on Rosie for this course, but you still need to install it for your account.

To use synto, you need to ensure the `ollama` and `synto` commands are on your path.

To do this, open `.bashrc` and paste these lines near the end:

```
export OLLAMA_MODELS=/data/csc4611/ollama/models
export PATH=$PATH:/data/csc4611/ollama/bin:/data/csc4611/python-root/bin
```

To enable this in a bash shell that is already open, run `source ~/.bashrc` or smiply `. ~/.bashrc` within that shell.  It will automatically be loaded into future shells.

Then, launch ollama:

```
ollama serve > ollama.log 2>&1 &
```

If you forget the last `&`, ollama will continue to run in your terminal. Use Ctl-Z to suspend it, and then `bg` to rerun it in the background.  If you forget the two pipes (`> ollama.log 2>&1`), ollama will continue to print stuff to your console, which could be annoying. You should probably stop and restart it if you do that.

Finally, you can run synto:

```
synto run
```

Synto probably won't do much the first time you run it.

To give it some material, take your reading reflection from last week. Place the markdown folder within `raw/reflections` within the course repo. Ensure the extension is `.md` rather than `.txt` -- Synto only looks for markdown files!

Then run `synto run` again.  You should see that synto finds your reading reflection and hopefully creates a new article or updates one of the existing articles with material from your reflection.

Next, run `synto review`. This will show any new drafts created by synto. You can work through it to see the drafts. For existing articles, I find I have to exit synto and run a `git diff` between the draft and the existing article to see if I like the changes because the `diff` feature within `synto` does not work well on Rosie yet. 

I have found a few `synto` commands useful for maintaining the synto repo:

* `synto run` -- as you've seen, this finds any new files within `raw`, and updates the wiki with drafts to include them.
* `synto review` -- again, as you've seen, this summarizes the drafts automatically created by synto and provides a CLI to review and approve them.
* `synto maintain` -- This checks all the links within the wiki, and reports broken links and orphaned articles that don't have any links to them.
* `synto query` -- Sometimes, synto creates a stub article without any content even though the topic for this article is already clearly addressed in your sources.  To generate content for the stub, you can run `synto query`, ask the question "Tell me about \_\_\_\_", where \_\_\_\_ is the title of the article that you wish to create material for.  Then simply paste the output into that article's draft and approve it through the `synto review`

To browse the wiki generated by Synto, I recommend cloning it to your laptop, installing obsidian, and opening the root of the repo (not the wiki) in Obsidian.

Write a very brief report, `report.txt`, in a markdown format. In this report, summarize what you observed while working with Synto.  Keep your report anonymous.  Also include one markdown file, converted to a `.txt` format, that Synto added to your wiki.  Submit these two .txt files to Canvas.


