title: "Reading: Applications of LLMs"

# Applications of LLMs

So far this term, we have assumed precisely one application of an LLM: the online chatbot.

But LLMs can be incorporated into larger applications in many ways. In this week's reading, we look at some of them.

## Classical applications of LLMs

LLMs can be used to solve classical machine-learning tasks, such as classification or regression tasks.  How?

Previously, we looked at [decoder-only configurations of transformers](https://d2l.ai/chapter_attention-mechanisms-and-transformers/large-pretraining-transformers.html#gpt-and-gpt-2). But transformers can be used in other configurations as well.

Let's look back through the rest of the section to see some other ways we can use transformers: [Dive into Deep Learning, Section 11.9: Large-Scale Pretraining with Transformers](https://d2l.ai/chapter_attention-mechanisms-and-transformers/large-pretraining-transformers.html)

Consider the discussion in section 11.9.1.2.

**1. Describe the network configuration used to train BERT for a classification problem**

Now let's skip over to [Dive into Deep Learning, Section 16.6: Fine-Tuning BERT for Sequence-Level and Token-Level Applications](https://d2l.ai/chapter_natural-language-processing-applications/finetuning-bert.html)

Consider Section 16.6.2.

**2. Describe the network configuration used to train BERT for a regression problem. Descrive how this differs from the configuration used for a classification problem**

## Modern application of LLMs: Embedding

In addition to the classical applications of classification and regression, there are many modern applications of LLMs as well.

One of the most widely useful is the idea of generating an embedding.  We have already seen that each token is embedded and that embedding is refined throughout that token's residual stream.  But in many applications, it can be useful to embed all of the tokens into a single embedding text.

How is this done? Two techniques are common:

1. Class token: Similar to the classification problem described for BERT above, include a `<CLS>` (class) token at the start of the input text, and train the LLM through fine-tuning on embedding-training datasets to produce high-quality embeddings at this token.
2. Average pooling: Take ALL the tokens outputs at the end of the residual stream, average them together, and fine-tune this on some embedding-training dataset.

These techniques are used by [Sentence Transformers](https://www.sbert.net/).  The output embeddings can be useful for powering semantic search.  That is, if we embed a large collection of documents and the user's search query with the same embedding module, we can find the closest documents as those with the lowest cosine similarity or Euclidean distance to the search query's embedding.

## Other modern applications of LLMs:

And you probably don't need me to tell you that LLMs are great for writing code, answering questions, summarizing texts, human language translation, and many other tasks! 

# Assessing LLMs

When an LLM performs a standard classification or regression test, we can assess its performance using the same techniques we would use to assess any other system's performance -- accuracy, mean square error (MSE), precision, recall, etc.

But when an LLM generates many tokens of text, it is less obvious how it can be evaluated.

Early transformers were evaluated by considering the [BLEU](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.3115/1073083.1073135) or [ROUGE-$n$](https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013.pdf) scores.  Both of these metrics evaluate a text by comparing how close it is to a provided gold-standard text (for example, a text written by a human expert).  Both BLEU and Rouge look at the statistics of how many words or sequences of words in the text generated by the LLM can be matched against the human-generated text.

While such evaluations often correlate with human judgment, they also clearly have limitations:

* There are often many ways to write something, and one doesn't always have to use a certain fixed set of words to properly communicate an idea.  These metrics can accept multiple user texts to give higher scores to a wider variety of answers, but still the machine's output can only be considered correct if it matches these pre-existing answers
* The comparison is based on the words used, not the grammatical structure of how those words are arranged.  One can image that a BLUE or ROUGE score could be very high while meaning nearly exactly the opposite of the correct output by the insertion of the word "not" in a few key places.

While providing an important starting point, these scores also point out how hard it is to properly evaluate generated text.  In general, we would prefer an evaluation technique that:

* Considers the full meaning of the text and not just of individual words or phrases
* Is sensitive to subtle variations in style
* Allows for any synonymous expressions to be used that carry the same meaning

And, in fact, for certain open-ended tasks, we may want to allow even more flexibility. We may want a metric that:

* Considers the possibility of a quality answer unlike any of those considered at training set creation time
* Considers the creativity of the answer

One way to do this is to ask people to evaluate an LLM's output.  This is the basis of the [Chatbot Arena](https://openlm.ai/chatbot-arena/) evaluations.  

Chatbot Arena has been renamed to just "Arena". Perhaps one of the best ways to experience the Arena is to enter it as a judge.  Visit [the Arena](https://arena.ai/), ask a tough question you don't mind being public, and see what happens next.

**3. Describe your experience as a judge in Arena.**

**4. Based on this experience, what are some strengths or weaknesses to Arena's approach to evaluating LLMs?**

In addition to using humans as judges, which is naturally rather expensive, we can have an LLM take the role of a human. Naturally, LLMs will be prone to making mistakes in judgement that humans would not make.  

For example, it rarely works well to simply prompt an LLM judge with something like "Look over this output. Is it done well?" -- LLMs often simply answer "yes" to questions like this whether or not there are problems with the output that are obvious to you. But many applications have specific questions related to details of that application where an LLM can be more successful.

For example, in an application where a customer asks for a product and a chatbot returns a list of product matches, it probably won't work to ask, "Are there errors in this response?" but it may work quite well to ask "Is the customer looking for a product? If so, do any of the products suggested by the chatbot match what the customer is looking for?"

As a second example, in an application where the chatbot is supposed to talk like a pirate, it probably won't work to ask, "Is the chatbot annoyingly piratey or repetitive in its responses?" but it may work quite well to ask, "Did the assistant use too many direct references to the user such as 'savvy', 'matey, 'me hearty' etc.? (Thanks to a student for providing the good prompt in this case!)

A third example: when testing a tortoise-care tutor, it probably won't work to ask, "Does the tortoise-care tutor ever recommend or condone practices that are dangerous to tortoises?" but it may work quite well to ask, "Does the chatbot compromise and condone harmful advice, e.g., by offering options of how to introduce a dog to live with a tortoise instead of firmly advising that these species should not be housed together?"

And finally, an analogy: It is easier to be a music critic than to be a concert musician.  The critic only needs to evalute various aspects of the music. They don't actually have to touch the keyboard and develop all of the fine-motor and improvisation skills that the musician does.  It's a lot easier to answer, "Does the music show variety in the improvisation?" than to come up with meaningful variety oneself.

**5. Give your own example of a task for an LLM-as-judge that is likely too broad**

**6. Provide a more specific task for an LLM judge that it may be able to answer more reliably**

**7. How is it possible for an LLM to reliably judge an unreliable output from the same LLM?**

One of the challenges of developing good LLM judgements is figuring out what aspects of your LLM are important to judge. That's the topic for next week's reading.
